hi everyone welcome back this is part
two of this video series part one lays
the foundation for expanding the current
diagnostic paradigm for npd you can find
a link to that video in the description
part two will focus on developing a more
comprehensive and compassionate model
for npd that includes both grandiose and
vulnerable dimensions of the disorder
the dsm and the npi form a feedback loop
where the dsm provides the description
and the npi provides the data that
supports new versions of the dsm
these constructs are referenced by
authors and screenwriters to create
fictional representations of narcissists
as villains and to prop up the
narcissistic abuse market that produces
titles like how to kill a narcissist
have you ever heard any other legitimate
mental health disorder talked about this
way
think about it for a second what if
depression or anxiety
were treated the same way that
narcissism is treated ironically when it
comes to narcissism we all may be
suffering from a lack of empathy
okay so the dsm is wrong and the npi is
wrong and popular media is wrong
then who's right and just what the heck
is narcissism the concept of narcissism
dates all the way back to the early 20th
century and a famous paper by freud
himself but the latter half of the 20th
century saw narcissism become an
extremely important concept in
psychology and that's because narcissism
is considered to be one of two polls
around which personality develops
there's the relationship poll how we
relate to others and there's the
narcissism poll how we relate to
ourselves in other words self-image
there is such a thing as healthy or
adaptive narcissism
that means that you've developed a
healthy stable and realistic self-image
and there's such a thing as unhealthy or
pathological narcissism where the
self-image is damaged or distorted it
can be distorted in a positive direction
which causes grandiosity
or and here's the clincher in a negative
direction
that gives you unrealistically negative
self-images that are unstable and in
constant danger of collapse
this is called vulnerable narcissism and
it is just starting to get recognized
but i would argue that it is ten times
more common than grandiose narcissism
these are the narcissists that
therapists see in their practices only
they don't recognize them as narcissists
they call them depressed or anxious or
bipolar
now i'm not saying that every depressed
person is a narcissist far from it
what i'm saying is that underlying
personality dysfunction
produces symptoms for vulnerable
narcissists those symptoms are often
mistaken for more familiar forms of
mental illness like depression
essentially when a person spends
exorbitant amounts of time and energy
attempting to maintain a positive
self-image and they go about doing so in
inflexible and maladaptive ways we call
that pathological narcissism
and contemporary research looks at the
interplay between two factors
narcissistic grandiosity and
narcissistic vulnerability
these terms simply describe the manner
in which a person is going about
attempting to manage their self-esteem
the vulnerable face of narcissism is
what has been missing from our
diagnostic picture and our national
discussion about this disorder
vulnerable narcissism involves the
conscious experience of helplessness
emptiness low self-esteem and shame
in other words
this guy
narcissus of ancient greek mythology is
the original narcissist the disorder is
named after him
he's often portrayed as gazing adoringly
at his own reflection
and people mistakenly believe that this
means he is vain or in love with himself
and while it is technically true that he
was in love with himself he believed he
was in love with another person
every time he attempted to touch this
ideal person that he saw in the water it
would vanish
our culture gets hung up on the fact
that he was in love with his own image
but that's not the point
the point is that he wasted his life in
pursuit of an illusion a fantasy of
perfection that ultimately led to
depression despair and emptiness
while many of us have heard the
beginning of this myth most haven't
heard the end where he dies from
starvation on the bank of the river
morrison writes the mirror image
fragmented each time narcissus reached
out to embrace it causing him to pine
away in melancholy and ultimately to die
the original narcissist was more
vulnerable than arrogant more depleted
and desperate than full of himself
the story of narcissus like the disorder
that bears his name
is a tragedy
as it turns out disney's beauty and the
beast had two narcissistic characters
gaston is the one everyone thinks of
he's the grandiose narcissist he lines
up almost perfectly with the dsm
definition and the popular image of
narcissism but what you didn't realize
is that the beast is also a narcissist
he has a damaged self-image
he obsessively ruminates about his
appearance he constantly compares
himself to an idealized image of himself
as a younger prince and then jealously
guards the withering rose he sees as his
last connection to that image of
perfection
he's hypersensitive to criticism easily
angered and he hides his true feelings
for fear of being rejected originally he
only allows bell to stay in the castle
because he thinks it will reverse the
spell and make him beautiful again
he's using her to salvage his
self-esteem
arguably compared to gaston the beast is
the more mentally ill and by that i mean
he's more symptomatic
gaston is very well defended by his
grandiosity but like the castle in which
he lives the beast is falling apart
and that's what we mean by vulnerable
narcissism
so what does vulnerable narcissism
actually look like
well it's not as easy to hate
vulnerable narcissism is correlated with
depression anxiety substance abuse and
even suicide
as i mentioned before contemporary
research looks at the interplay between
grandiosity and vulnerability
these terms simply describe how a person
is attempting to manage their unstable
self-esteem it's important to underscore
that these are not mutually exclusive
types of narcissist
rather than a cold faucet and a hot
faucet
think of a combined faucet where
grandiosity and vulnerability mixed
together depending on the situation a
2010 article in the annual review of
clinical psychology a peer-reviewed
journal said it best
the core feature of pathological
narcissism is not grandiosity but rather
defective self-esteem regulation leading
to grandiose and vulnerable self and
affect states so individuals with
pathological narcissism fluctuate
between grandiosity and vulnerability
some may spend more time in a grandiose
state while others may spend more time
in a vulnerable state
it depends on how well defended the
individual is
grandiosity is a defensive distortion
that occurs in response to deeply held
feelings of inferiority envy anger and
shame
when the grandiose defenses break down
the underlying vulnerable self-image is
exposed
for some narcissists this rarely if ever
happens
while others live their lives in a near
constant state of breakdown
most float somewhere in between
that being said if a patient in a
vulnerable narcissistic state did walk
into a therapist consulting room how
would they diagnose them
well it's currently not possible to
diagnose a patient whose narcissistic
presentation is predominantly vulnerable
such a patient could plausibly receive
any combination of the following
diagnoses all of them could be
technically accurate but still miss the
essential problem
so what are the common core features of
narcissism
what should a clinician look for to
diagnose a narcissist well here's a list
of common features
a few of these overlap with the dsm-5
criteria but most of them don't
instead they're taken from clinical and
research literature first there's
interpersonal exploitativeness
and that's the tendency to use others
whether intentionally or unintentionally
in the service of self-esteem
maintenance
there's self-sacrificing
self-enhancement and that's the tendency
to perform
charitable deeds or give people
compliments or do good things for others
in the hopes that it will reflect
positively on the narcissistic
individual
grandiose fantasy
that's the belief that one is better
than others or more deserving
the important points here are that this
belief can be conscious or unconscious
and that it is fundamentally
compensatory meaning that it's used to
prop up underlying unstable self-esteem
there's contingent self-esteem
that's the tendency to base self-image
and self-esteem on the reactions of
others
this is why narcissists can appear
overly sensitive and easily wounded
hiding the self that's the tendency to
hide authentic thoughts needs and
feelings from other people for fear that
they will lead to traumatic rejection
and abandonment
devaluing that's when an individual
feels like they're better than others or
they cast other people aside when those
people no longer serve a self-esteem
maintenance function
and by the way a narcissist can also
devalue themselves
which leads to depressive episodes and
even suicide entitlement rage
narcissists tend to react to any
perceived threat with defensive rage
sometimes the rage is turned outwards
toward others
but sometimes the rage is directed
inward and they attack and devalue
themselves for not being good enough
emptiness this is based on something
called identity diffusion which is
common in people with personality
disorders there's a feeling of inner
emptiness because they lack a stable
integrated sense of self chronically
fragmenting self
narcissists base their self image on
unrealistic ideas of being perfect
it's thought that they do this because
of early relational trauma that occurred
at a time when they were attempting to
create a realistic self-image
because of this trauma they're stuck
with a self-image that is unrealistic
and that falls apart easily which we
call fragmentation
when this happens the narcissist tumbles
into a terrifying world filled with
something a famous psychoanalyst named
donald winicott called primitive agonies
these are experiences of unthinkable
anxiety that occasionally lead to
substance abuse or violence or even
suicide perfectionism and idealization
this is the tendency to feel that one
either is or must be perfect
and the tendency to idealize other
people as extensions of the
idealized perfect self
it's thought that this occurs when
children are not shown through warmth
and acceptance that they will still be
loved even if they aren't perfect
and finally shame
often called the underbelly of
narcissism
shame is the feeling that one's entire
self is bad unwanted or unworthy
it's a toxic experience that leads
people to become at odds with themselves
shame breeds both grandiosity as a
defense and depression when the
idealized self that is created to combat
shame fails to live up to its promise
i hope that by now it's clear that
narcissism is much more than a preening
peacock or an evil stepmother
although to be fair it can be both of
those things but more often it's the
quietly depressed or anxious person who
feels they can never live up to their
own unrealistic standards it's the guy
who seems to have everything but
suddenly shoots himself because he was
carrying around a broken self-image and
he felt he never lived up to who he was
supposed to be it's the child who was
emotionally neglected by self-absorbed
parents and grew up relying on fantasies
of self-sufficiency when that child
tries to make it as an adult in the
world they feel chronically invisible
empty depressed and angry narcissism is
a fortress built around deep emotional
wounds whether the fortress is
functioning well or falling apart
all who struggle with narcissism carry
deep emotional pain in their core
the author stephen johnson calls
narcissists used children these are
people whose most basic needs for
consistent love and mirroring were
denied or distorted when they were young
the vast majority of people who we would
call narcissistic are not manipulative
villains looking for the next victim
they're like people drowning in the sea
who will blindly step on another
person's head out of the sheer panic of
feeling like they're about to go under
they're like starving people who are so
hungry for something to sustain their
fragile self-image that they can think
of little else
their self-centeredness is about
survival not an abundance of self-love
nevertheless
narcissism remains one of the few mental
health issues that is still openly
mocked derided and equated with evil
in the last 10 years a number of studies
have been looking at these issues
eventually producing a measure that
actually seems to be a huge improvement
over the npi
it's called the pathological narcissism
inventory and it's a full spectrum
measure that assesses both grandiose and
vulnerable dimensions of narcissism it's
also correlated with other measures of
emotional distress
variable self-esteem and hallmarks of
significant personality pathology
in other words
we're finally approaching a definition
of narcissism as a mental illness
as opposed to a moral or character
defect
the current dsm model of npd arguably
does more harm than good it contributes
to diagnostic and research confusion
while indirectly supporting a growing
industry based on vilification and
stigmatization of a vulnerable
population
while some individuals with npd may
present in accordance with the dsm
criteria
research suggests that this is rare and
that many narcissistic individuals seek
treatment experiencing intense feelings
of worthlessness depression anxiety
interpersonal problems inconsistent
self-image shame substance abuse and
suicidality such individuals are not
served by a skewed and inaccurate
diagnostic model nor are they helped by
public fear and antagonism
it's time to rethink the dominant
diagnostic paradigm pertaining to
narcissism in hopes that such revisions
will have a positive effect on the
widespread stigma relating to this form
of mental illness
thanks for joining me i've included the
references for this video in the
description
if you have any questions or comments
feel free to leave them in the comment
section below
if you'd like to learn more about
narcissism and related topics you can
visit my website at
www.dreatonson.com take care